---
layout: post
title:  "RSIC-V(2): Bitwise Instructions & Branch Instructions"
date:   2025-04-10
tag: Computer Architecture
---
# Bitwise Instructions

Left and Right Shift: Shift the bits of the number left/right, then fill the remaining bits

- Ex. 0b0001 << 3 = 0b1000 = 8
- Ex. 0b1011 >> 2 = 0b0010

Shifts have numerical equivalents in math

● Left Shift by n -> Multiply by $2^n$

● Right Shift by n -> (Floor) Divide by  $2^n$

For left shifts, we always fill the new bits with 0s

For right shifts, dividing an unsigned number should fill the bits with 0s. But right-shifting a signed number shouldn't fill with 0s always

Ex. 0b1000 0010 = -126 in 8 bits. If we right-shift by 1 and fill with 0s, we get 0b0100 0001 = 65. But if we right-shift by 1 and fill with the sign bit, we get 0b1100 0001 = -63 = -126/2

Logical Left Shift

- Shift left, add zeros
- Same as multiplication by a power of 2

Logical Right Shift

- Shift right, zero-extend
- Same as dividing an unsigned number by a power of 2

Arithmetic Right Shift

- Shift right, sign-extend
- NOT the same as dividing a signed number by a power of 2

```bash
and x3 x1 x2
or x3 x1 x2
xor x3 x1 x2
sll x3 x1 x2 # Shift Left Logical
srl x3 x1 x2 # Shift Right Logical
sra x3 x1 x2 # Shift Right Arithmetic
```

Each one has a corresponding immediate version. For example, we can do a bitwise XOR with 0xFFFF FFFF = -1 to run a pseudo-instruction bitwise NOT.

```bash
xori x1 x2 -1
```

# Branch Instructions

**Branch instructions** test a condition and possibly change the execution order of instructions by jumping to the address of another instruction. The operands in the test of a branch statement must be constant values or in registers. Branches are used to implement control structures like if and switch as well as for and while. RISC-V’s branch instructions jump to the address stored by a label. 

```bash
beq x1 x2 Label # Branch if equal
bne x1 x2 Label # Branch if not equal
blt x1 x2 Label # Branch if less than (signed) (x1 < x2)
bge x1 x2 Label # Branch if greater or equal (signed)
bltu x1 x2 Label # Branch if less than (unsigned)
bgeu x1 x2 Label # Branch if greater or equal (unsigned)
```

You can reverse inputs of existing instructions to achieve the reverse test:

```bash
blt x2 x1 # x1 >= x2
```

In addition, there’s an **unconditional jump** that can immediately divert the execution to a new address. 

```bash
 j Label
```