---
layout: post
title:  "RSIC-V(1): Arithmetic Instructions"
date:   2025-04-10
tag: Computer Architecture
---

The words of a computer’s language are called **instructions**, and its vocabulary is called an **instruction set**.

There two typical kinds of instruction set:

- Reduced Instructor Set Computer (RISC) which is simpler than the old instructions.
- Complex Instructor Set Computer (CISC).

RISC-V is a particular RSIC which is read “risk five”.

The size of a register in the RISC-V architecture is 32 bits. Groups of 32 bits occur so frequently that they are given the name **word** in the RISC-V architecture.  The RISC-V architects also conceived multiple variants of the **ISA** (instruction set architecture). In addition to this variant, known as RV32, a variant named RV64 has 64-bit registers, called a **doubleword**, whose larger addresses make RV64 better suited to processors for servers and smart phones.

RV32 registers are numbered from 0 to 31, referred to by number: x0 – x31. The register x0 is special and always stores 0. We give it a special name — zero.  So only 31 registers are available to hold variables. The other 31 registers are all identical in behavior.

The RISC-V assembly language notation instructs a computer to **add** the value stored in two registers x2 and x3 and to put their sum in x1. Comments are written using the # symbol.

```bash
 add x1,x2,x3 # add x2 and x3
```

Immediate is a numerical constant.  They appear often in code, so there are special instructions for them. Add Immediate:

```bash
addi x3,x4,10
```

But not every instruction has its immediate version.

Common mistakes

```bash
addi x3,x4,x5  
add x3,x4,10
```

Register zero is very useful for moving a value from one register to another.

```c
f = g
```

Assume x3 for f, x4 for g:

```bash
add x3,x4,x0
```

**Subtraction**

```bash
sub x3,x4,x5
```

There is no subtract immediate in RISC-V. You can do it by adding a negative immediate. 

```bash
addi x3,x4,-10 
```

**Set less than**

```bash
slt x1 x2 x3
```

Compares x2 to x3. If x2 < x3 (signed), sets rd to 1. Otherwise sets x1 to 0. There’re variants for this instruction. 

```bash
slti x1 x2 x3 # for an immediate
sltu x1 x2 x3 # for an unsigned number
sltiu x1 x2 x3 # for an unsigned immediate
```

Multiplication, division, mod, float addition, subtraction and etc exist as extensions of RISC-V, but are not by themselves in base RISC-V as circuit is significantly more complicated than bitwise ops or addition. For multiplying/dividing by powers of 2, we can use shifts instead.

Multiplication

```bash
mul x1 x2 x3
```

There is no multiplicate immediate in RISC-V.