---
layout: post
title:  "Deadlock"
date:   2025-04-12
tag: Operating System
---

Assume there were two threads, a producer P0 and a consumer C0. . Here is a wrong case

1. C0 decrements mutex to 0 and acquires the lock.
2. C0 decrements full to -1 and sleeps
3. P0 decrements mutex to -1 and sleeps
4. Both of them will sleep forever

There is a simple cycle here. The consumer holds the mutex and is waiting for the someone to signal full. The producer could signal full but is waiting for the mutex. Every thread is then waiting for an action to be taken by another thread — this situation we called **deadlock**. 

To solve this problem, we simply must reduce the scope of the lock. We just simply leave the full and empty wait and signal code outside.

One of the most famous concurrency problems posed, and solved, by Dijkstra, is known as the **dining philosopher’s problem**. 

A round of philosophers sit about a round table. There are the same total number of forks as there are philosophers and one fork is placed between every two philosophers that puts a single fork to the left and right of each philosopher. The philosopher run the traditional think-eat loop. After he sits quietly thinking for a while, a philosopher gets hungry. To eat, a philosopher grabs the fork to the left, grabs the fork to the right, eats for a time using both forks, and then replaces the forks and goes back to thinking. 


Here’s a simple solution. However, the deadlock occurs if no one is eating, and then all the philosophers grab the fork to the left, and then look over and wait for the right fork. 

```c
void get_forks(int p) {
    space(p); printf("%d: try %d\n", p, left(p)); space_end();
    Sem_wait(&forks[left(p)]);
    space(p); printf("%d: try %d\n", p, right(p)); space_end();
    Sem_wait(&forks[right(p)]);
}

void put_forks(int p) {
    Sem_post(&forks[left(p)]);
    Sem_post(&forks[right(p)]);
}
```

One simple and safe solution is to restrict the number of philosophers allowed to even try to eat at once. If you only allow n-1 philosophers to eat, then the deadlock cannot occur. This restrict-competition-to-avoid-the-deadlock can be a stable technique for avoiding deadlock. This is how Dijkstra himself solved the problem.

```c
void get_forks(int p) {
    if (p == 4) {
        Sem_wait(&forks[right(p)]);
        Sem_wait(&forks[left(p)]);
    } else {
        Sem_wait(&forks[left(p)]);
        Sem_wait(&forks[right(p)]);
    }
}
```

One other problem is this: how can we prevent too many threads from doing something at once?

This is especially important for a memory-intensive region which acquires a large amount of memory. 

One solution is to set a threshold and then use a semaphore to limit the number of threads concurrently executing the piece of code. The value of the semaphore is initialized to the maximum number of threads we wish to enter the memory-intensive region at once. This approach is called **throttling**, and is considered a form of admission control.