---
layout: post
title:  "Lock(5): Wakeup Race"
date:   2025-04-11
tag: Operating System
---
A thread might be interrupted while acquiring or releasing the lock, when another thread tries to acquire the lock, for example, and thus cause other threads to wait extra time for it to run again. However, the time spent spinning is quite limited as there’re just a few instructions inside the lock code. 

A problem sometimes called the **wakeup/waiting race** might occur. When a thread is about to call park() and another thread releases the lock at this time, this thread could be removed from the queue. This thread then calls park() and sleeps forever. 

Solaris solves this problem by adding a system call: `setpark()`. By calling this routine, a thread can indicate it is about to park. If it then happens to be interrupted and another thread calls unpark before park is actually called, the subsequent park won’t sleep the thread. 

Linux provides a futex which is similar to the Solaris interface but provides more in-kernel functionality.  The call to `futex_wait(address, expected)` puts the calling thread to sleep, assuming the value at the address address is equal to expected. If it is not equal, the call returns immediately. The call to the routine `futex_wake(address)` wakes one thread that is waiting on the queue.

This code snippet is from `lowlevellock.h` in the nptl library in GNU 2.9 ([Index of /gnu/glibc](https://ftp.gnu.org/gnu/glibc/)). 

```c
void mutex_lock (int *mutex) {
    int v;
    // Bit 31 was clear, we got the mutex (fastpath)
    if (atomic_bit_test_set (mutex, 31) == 0)
        return;
    atomic_increment (mutex);
    while (1) {
        if (atomic_bit_test_set (mutex, 31) == 0) {
            atomic_decrement (mutex);
            return;
        }
        // Have to waitFirst to make sure futex value
        // we are monitoring is negative (locked).
        v = *mutex;
        if (v >= 0)
	        continue;
        futex_wait (mutex, v);
    }
}

void mutex_unlock (int *mutex) {
    // Adding 0x80000000 to counter results in 0 if and
    // only if there are not other interested threads
    if (atomic_add_zero (mutex, 0x80000000))
        return;
    // There are other threads waiting for this mutex,
    // wake one of them up.
    futex_wake (mutex);
}
```

It uses a single integer to track both whether the lock is held or not (the high bit of the integer) and the number of waiters on the lock (all the other bits). Thus, if the lock is negative, it is held because the high bit is set and that bit determines the sign of the integer. With only one thread acquiring and releasing a lock, it just uses the atomic bit test-and-set to lock and an atomic add to release the lock.