---
layout: post
title:  "Lock(4): Yield"
date:   2025-04-11
tag: Operating System
---

The hardware-based locks are simple but inefficient in some cases. If there are N threads contending for a lock, N - 1 time slices may be wasted as the waiting threads do nothing but check a value that isn’t going to change. How can we develop a lock that doesn’t needlessly waste time spinning on the CPU? 
****

Our first try is that we assume the OS has a **yield** system call. It moves the caller from the running state to the ready state, and thus makes a context switch. The yielding thread essentially de-schedules itself. If a thread happens to call lock() and find a lock held, it will simply yield the CPU, and thus it won’t spin on the CPU. 

While better than our spinning approach, the cost of a context switch can be substantial, and there is thus plenty of waste. Worse, this approach does not address starvation.  

We need a scheduler which won’t  yield the CPU immediately or  spin waiting for the lock. To do this, we will need a little more OS support, as well as a queue to keep track of which threads are waiting to acquire the lock.

For simplicity, we will use the support provided by Solaris, in terms of two calls: park() to put a calling thread to sleep, and unpark() to wake a particular thread by its thread ID.

```c
typedef struct __lock_t {
    int flag;
    int guard;
    queue_t *q;
} lock_t;

void lock_init(lock_t *m) {
    m->flag = 0;
    m->guard = 0;
    queue_init(m->q);
}

void lock(lock_t *m) {
    while (TestAndSet(&m->guard, 1) == 1)
        ; //acquire guard lock by spinning
    if (m->flag == 0) {
        m->flag = 1; // lock is acquired
        m->guard = 0;
    } else {
        queue_add(m->q, gettid());
        setpark();
        m->guard = 0;
        park();
    }
}

void unlock(lock_t *m) {
    while (TestAndSet(&m->guard, 1) == 1)
        ; //acquire guard lock by spinning
    if (queue_empty(m->q))
        m->flag = 0; // let go of lock; no one wants it
    else
        unpark(queue_remove(m->q)); // hold lock for next thread
    m->guard = 0;
}
```

We combine the old test-and-set idea with an explicit queue of lock waiters to make a more efficient lock. We use a guard lock as a spin-lock around the flag and queue manipulations.

When two threads acquire the lock at the same time, the first thread updates the guard to 1 and the second thread will spin-wait.  After the first thread has updated the flag to 1 and the guard to 0, the second thread can execute the remaining code inside lock(). It detects that the flag is 1 so it is added to queue and yields the CPU. Note that it also updates the guard to 0 so that other threads can be added to the queue or the first thread can then release the queue.

If the first thread wants to release the lock, it will spin around while the second thread has updated the guard and is trying to acquire the lock. It won’t update the flag to 0 if the second thread is added to the queue. When the second thread is removed from the queue and wakes up, it won’t call lock() again and update the flag. Thus, we just pass the lock directly from the first thread to the second thread.