---
layout: post
title:  "Semaphores"
date:   2025-04-12
tag: Operating System
---

A semaphore is an object with an integer value that we can manipulate with two routines. One can use semaphores as both locks and condition variables. ****In the POSIX standard, we use the following functions:  

```c
#include <semaphore.h>
sem_t s;
sem_init(&s, 0, 1);
sem_wait(&s);
sem_post(&s);
```

In the figure, we declare a semaphore s and initialize it to the value 1 by passing 1 in as the third argument to  `sem_init()`. We must first initialize the semaphore to some value before calling any other routine to interact with the semaphore. The second argument to `sem_init()` will be set to 0 which indicates that the semaphore is shared between threads in the same process. It actually can also be shared between different processes. 

`sem_wait()` will decrement the value of semaphore s by one. It will return right away when the result was one or higher. Otherwise, it will cause the caller thread to sleep. 

`sem_post()` does not wait for some particular condition to hold. Rather, it simply increments the value of the semaphore by one and then, if there is a thread waiting to be woken, wakes one of them up. 

The value of the semaphore, when negative, is equal to the number of waiting threads.

First, we use the semaphore as a lock. Because locks only have two states (held and not held), we sometimes call a semaphore used as a lock a **binary semaphore**.

```c
sem_t m;
sem_init(&m, 0, X); // init to X; what should X be?
sem_wait(&m);
// critical section here
sem_post(&m);
```

Assume we have two threads: thread 0 and thread 1:

1. When thread 0 tries to enter the critical region, the value of the semaphore is decremented to 0.
2. Thread 0 holds the value of the lock and execute the code within the critical region.
3. When thread 1 tries to enter the critical region, the value of the semaphore is decremented to -1.
4. Thread 1 sleeps
5. Thread 0 has finished its execution and increments the semaphore to 0. Then it wakes thread 1.
6. When thread 1 finishes, it will again increment the value of the semaphore, restoring it to 1 again.

Then we use the semaphore to solve the the producer/consumer problem.

Our first attempt at solving the problem introduces two semaphores, empty and full. Assume there is only one buffer in the array.

```c

#define MAX 1;
int count = 0;
int buffer[MAX];
int fill = 0;
int use = 0;

void put(int value) {
    buffer[fill] = value; // Line F1
    fill = (fill + 1) % MAX; // Line F2
}

int get() {
    int tmp = buffer[use]; // Line G1
    use = (use + 1) % MAX; // Line G2
    return tmp;
}

void *producer(void *arg) {
    int i;
    for (i = 0; i < loops; i++) {
			Sem_wait(&empty);
			put(i);
			Sem_post(&full);
    }
}

void *consumer(void *arg) {
	int tmp = 0;
  while (tmp != -1) {
		Sem_wait(&full);
		tmp = get();
		Sem_post(&empty);
		printf("%lld %d\n", (long long int) arg, tmp);
  }
}
int main(int argc, char *argv[]) {
	.....
	Sem_init(&empty, 0, Max); // max are empty 
  Sem_init(&full, 0, 0);    // 0 are full
  ......
}
```

Imagine again there are two threads, a producer P0 and a consumer C0. Here is a case

1. P0 decrements the value of empty semaphore to 0
2. P0 fills the buffer at index 0
3. C0 decrements the value of fill semaphore to -1 and sleeps
4. P0 increments fill to 0 and wakes C0
5. C0 consumes the buffer
6. P0 decrements empty to -1 and sleeps
7. C0 increments empty to 0 and wakes P0

If we have more producers and consumers, a data racing occurs. Suppose there were three threads, two producers P0, P1 and a consumer C0. Here is a wrong case:

1. P0 decrements the value of empty semaphore to 1
2. P0 fills the buffer at index 0
3. P1 decrements the value of empty semaphore to 0
4. P1 fills the buffer at index 0, which means that the old data there is overwritten. 

If there’re two consumers, it is also possible to consume the same data twice. What we’ve forgotten here is mutual exclusion.  The filling and emptying of a buffer is a critical section, and thus must be guarded by a lock.

```c

......

void *producer(void *arg) {
    int i;
    for (i = 0; i < loops; i++) {
	    Sem_wait(&mutex);
			Sem_wait(&empty);
			put(i);
			Sem_post(&full);
			Sem_post(&mutex);
    }
}

void *consumer(void *arg) {
	int tmp = 0;
  while (tmp != -1) {
	  Sem_wait(&mutex);
		Sem_wait(&full);
		tmp = get();
		Sem_post(&empty);
		Sem_post(&mutex);
		printf("%lld %d\n", (long long int) arg, tmp);
  }
}

int main(int argc, char *argv[]) {
	.....
	Sem_init(&mutex, 0, 1); 
	Sem_init(&empty, 0, Max); // max are empty 
  Sem_init(&full, 0, 0);    // 0 are full
  ......
}
```

In the above program, things will quickly grind to halt as all threads start up and immediately start waiting on one of the two counters, which all start at 0. Assume we have two producers and two consumers. 

A **general semaphore** can take on any value and allow a specific number of threads to enter the critical region. For example, if you want at most four threads to enter a section, you could initialize the semaphore to 4. The first four threads can decrement the semaphore and enter the region, but at that point, the semaphore will be 0 and any other threads will block outside the region util one of these four threads leaves and signals the semaphore.

You can use a general semaphore for representing the quantity of an available resource. Let’s say you need to limit the number of simultaneously open file descriptors among multiple threads. You could initialize a maximum number of open file descriptors.

A general semaphore can also be used to implement a form of rendezvous between threads, such as when Thread2 needs to know Thread1 is done with something before proceeding. A rendezvous semaphore is usually initialized to 0. Thread1 waits on the semaphore until Thread 2 signals the semaphore when ready. And you use several semaphores to have Thread1 wait several times. In this case, the semaphore is counting the number of times an action occurred.