---
layout: post
title:  "Lock(2): Spin Lock & Hardware Support"
date:   2025-04-11
tag: Operating System
---

The earliest multiprocessor systems, such as the Burroughs B5000 in the early 1960’s, provides further hardware support for locking. 

The simplest bit of hardware support to understand is known as a **test-and-set** (or **atomic exchange**) instruction. We define what it does via the following C code snippet: 

```c
int TestAndSet(int *old_ptr, int new) {
    int old = *old_ptr; // fetch old value at old_ptr
    *old_ptr = new; // store ’new’ into old_ptr
    return old; // return the old value
}
```

It returns the old value pointed to by the old ptr, and simultaneously updates said value to new. The key, of course, is that this sequence of operations is performed atomically. Thus,  it enables you to “test” the old value (which is what is returned) while simultaneously “setting” the memory location to a new value. 

This instruction is enough to build a simple **spin lock**. When the thread calls lock() and then calls `TestAndSet(flag, 1)` to test the flag, the routine will return 0 while atomically setting the value to 1, so the thread can hold the lock. The thread will also  when testing. Then if other threads test the flag, the method will return the old value at flag, which is 1, while simultaneously setting it to 1 again.  

It is the simplest type of lock to build, and simply spins, using CPU cycles, until the lock becomes available. To achieve fairness, it requires a preemptive scheduler. For example, the scheduler will interrupt a thread via a timer, in order to run a different thread, from time to time. Without such scheduler, a thread spinning on a CPU will never relinquish it. 
Its performance is bad on the single processor.  Each of waiting threads will spin for the duration of a time slice before giving up the CPU, a waste of CPU cycles. But for a multiple processor, spinning to wait for a lock held on another processor doesn’t waste many cycles in this case, and thus this lock can be effective.

Another hardware primitive that some systems provide is known as the **compare-and-swap instruction**, called on SPARC, or **compare-and-exchange**, called on x86. The basic idea is to test whether the value at the specific address is equal to expected, 0, for example. if so, update the memory location with the new value, 1, for example. If not, do nothing. In either case, return the original value at that memory location, thus allowing the code calling compare-and-swap to know whether it succeeded or not. An example is illustrated by the following C code snippet:

```c
void lock(lock_t *lock) {
    while (CompareAndSwap(&lock->flag, 0, 1) == 1)
    ; // spin
}
```

The rest of the code is the same as the test-and-set example above. This code works quite similarly; it simply checks if the flag is 0 and if so, atomically swaps in a 1 thus the current thread acquires the lock.

It is a more powerful instruction than test-and-set, which can be used in other fields such as lock-free synchronization.

Some platforms provide a pair of instructions that work in concert to help build critical sections. On the MIPS architecture, for example, the **load-linked** and **store-conditional** instructions can be used in tandem to build locks and other concurrent structures.  Alpha, PowerPC, and ARM provide similar instructions

Here is the C pseudocode for these instruction

```c
int LoadLinked(int *ptr) {
    return *ptr;
}

int StoreConditional(int *ptr, int value) {
    if (no update to *ptr since LL to this addr) {
        *ptr = value;
        return 1; // success!
    } else {
        return 0; // failed to update
    }
}
```

The load-linked operates much like a typical load instruction, and simply fetches a value from memory and places it in a register. The key difference comes with the store-conditional, which only updates the value stored at the address just load-linked from if no intervening store to the address has taken place. In the case of success, the store conditional returns 1 and updates the value at `ptr` to value; if it fails, the value at `ptr` is not updated and 0 is returned. When two threads complete for a lock, the store to the address  for one of which will be intervened. 

This is an example of a lock using these two instructions.

```c
void lock(lock_t *lock) {
    while (LoadLinked(&lock->flag) || !StoreConditional(&lock->flag, 1))
    ; // spin
}
```

Here is a case for the failure of the store-conditional. One thread calls lock() and executes the load-linked, returning 0 as the lock is not held. Before it can attempt the store-conditional, it is interrupted and another thread enters the lock code and also gets 0. At this point, two threads have each executed the load-linked and each are about to attempt the store-conditional. However, only one of these threads will succeed in updating the flag to 1 and acquire the lock. The second thread to attempt the store-conditional will fail because the other thread updated the value of flag between its load-linked and store-conditional. It has to try to acquire the lock again.