---
layout: post
title:  "Lock(1): Introduction"
date:   2025-04-11
tag: Operating System
---

A **lock** allows only a single thread into a critical section. It is a variable, and you must declare a lock variable of some kind to use.  This lock variable holds the state of the lock at any instant in time. It is either available (or unlocked or free) and thus no thread holds the lock, or acquired (or locked or held), and thus exactly one thread holds the lock. 

The semantics of the lock() and unlock() routines are simple.

The thread calls lock() to acquire the lock. If no other thread holds the lock (i.e., it is free), the thread will acquire the lock and enter the critical section and thus becomes the owner of the lock. If another thread then calls lock() on that same lock variable, it will not return as the lock is acquired. In this way, other threads are prevented from entering the critical section.

Once the owner of the lock calls unlock(), the lock is now available again. If there are waiting threads which are stuck in lock(), one of them will notice or be informed of this change of the lock’s state and acquire the lock

The name that the POSIX library uses for a lock is a mutex, as it is used to provide mutual exclusion between threads. 

``` bash
pthread_mutex_t lock = PTHREAD_MUTEX_INITIALIZER;
Pthread_mutex_lock(&lock); // wrapper; exits on failure
balance = balance + 1;
Pthread_mutex_unlock(&lock);
```

The question arises: how to build a efficient lock?

To evaluate whether a lock works (and works well), we should establish some basic criteria. 

The first is whether the lock does its basic task, which is to provide mutual exclusion.

The second is fairness that avoids the starvation of any thread. 
The final criterion is performance, specifically the time overheads added by using the lock. There are a few different cases that are worth considering here.  One is the case of no contention; when a single thread is running and grabs and releases the lock, what is the overhead of doing so? Another is the case where multiple threads are contending for the lock on a single CPU, especially when there are multiple CPUs. 

One of the earliest solutions used to provide mutual exclusion was to disable interrupts for critical sections by some kind of special hardware instruction. This solution was invented for single-processor systems.

The main positive of this approach is its simplicity.  The negatives, unfortunately, are many.  

1. This approach must allow the user application interrupts on and off, which is a privileged operation. Thus, it violates the isolation.
2. The approach does not work on multiprocessors. The threads running on other processors could enter the critical section even if the interrupt of the current CPU is disable. 
3. Turning off interrupts for extended periods of time can lead to interrupts becoming lost by the OS, which can lead to serious systems problems. For example, the CPU could miss the fact that a disk device has finished a read request.

For these reasons, turning off interrupts is only used in limited contexts. For example, in some cases an operating system itself will use interrupt masking to guarantee atomicity when accessing its own data structures,

To move beyond interrupt-based techniques, we can use a simple variable (flag) to indicate whether some thread has possession of a lock. The flag will be 1 if the lock is required. When a thread tries to call lock(), lock() will test whether the flag is 1. If the flag is not 1, it then sets the flag to 1 and let the current thread hold the lock. Other threads will simply spin-wait in the while loop for that thread to release the lock. When the thread inside the critical region calls unlock() to exit, it will clear the flag. 

This approach may not be correct. We can easily produce a case where both threads set the flag to 1 and both threads are thus able to enter the critical section.

It also has the performance problem. It endlessly checks the value of flag when the lock is held, a technique known as spin-waiting. The waiting thread can’t do any other things.