---
layout: post
title:  "Trap Introduction"
date:   2025-04-08 09-00-00
tag: Operating System
---

There are two kinds of events which cause the CPU to set aside ordinary execution of instructions and force a transfer of control to special code in the kernel that handles the event.

**Exception**

- Caused by an event during the execution of the current program. The event is usually an instruction (user or kernel) does something illegal, such as divide by 0 or use an invalid virtual address.
- Synchronous: it must be handled immediately.

**Hardware interrupt** or simply interrupt

- Caused by an event external to the current running program. The event usually occurs when a device signals that it needs attention, for example when the disk hardware finishes a read or write request.
- Asynchronous: It does not need to be handled immediately.

When a hardware interrupt occurs, the CPU pauses its current task, saves its state, and jumps to an **interrupt service routine** (ISR) that handles the specific interrupt. After handling the interrupt, the CPU resumes its previous task.

Executing system calls or dealing with exceptions requires another mechanism, called **trap**, that allow the OS to take control of the CPU. The special instruction that raises the hardware privilege level is called a **trap instruction**. The special instruction that lowers the hardware privilege level is called a **return-from-trap instruction**.

The **trap handler** is the code that services exceptions and system calls:

- Complete all instructions before the faulting instruction
- Flush all instructions after the faulting instruction.
- Transfer execution to trap handler (runs in supervisor mode). Optionally return to original program and re-execute instruction

How does the trap know which code to run inside the OS in a trap? Clearly, the calling process can’t specify an address to jump to as it will allow the user program to jump anywhere into the kernel. Instead, the kernel does so by setting up a **trap table** in kernel mode at boot time.  The system call number is also set in the trap table. The trap table informs the hardware of the locations of the ****trap handlers.